Make-as-You-Play” Game of New World Discovery
for 1 Player
by R. Winder, Version 1.1
The First Sovereignty spread humanity to every corner of the
galaxy, but eons have passed since its fall, and the countless
worlds once under its thumb became no more than whispered
legends to one another. Now, a potent new FTL advancement,
which rumors say emerged from the cryptic galactic core, grants
humanity the hope of travel to the farthest stars in a single
lifetime. You are one of the few with the mettle to give up your
planet-bound life and become a STAR CHARTER.
1 Introduction
Star Charter is a card-driven solitaire game where you play a star charter, striking out
from your home planet to travel the space lanes and the vast void, discovering long-lost
worlds of a densely inhabited galaxy. When you have discovered three new worlds, you
have won the game, but it is possible to become adrift in space and lose. Whether you
win or lose, the known galaxy has the potential to grow with each new game.
This is a “Make-as-You-Play” game, which means that the game starts with a few
materials (a map, paper, index cards, and colored cubes) and the remaining components
will be generated as needed during play. Each game will see the addition of new cards,
which represent the worlds in the galaxy.
These rules include tables and guidelines for making new cards as needed, and this
makes every copy of Star Charter an evolving galaxy. In addition, it means that each game
inherits all components added or changed in the previous games. The galaxy’s worlds
can grow endlessly over a connected campaign as players return to see what each new
era holds for the future of humanity.
The core gameplay involves some mild balancing of risk and reward as your fuel
gradually allows you to explore remoter regions of space. Nevertheless, Star Charter can
lean more toward a role-playing game relying on imagination and creative writing. You
can choose the degree to which you impose your own creativity. As you visit and learn
about worlds, you can also use these prompts to journal longer descriptions of them, or
you can return to the cards after the game and flesh out their entries in a log.
Star Charter aims to be a brisk and perhaps amusing world-building game that may spark
your imagination to do more with your creations as you see fit.
2 About the Game
As a star charter, your goal each game is to visit three new worlds. Your score at the end
will also scale with the length of your journey, where longer journeys score higher.
Worlds can be close or distant, but the further you travel, the more later star charters
learn to expend their fuel with the appropriate power to reach deeper and deeper reaches
of space. Therefore, as you travel, you may also wish to pass through known worlds to
increase the scientific understanding of space travel and reach sectors you might not be
able to visit otherwise. Longer journeys may make it easier to find more unusual worlds.
2.1 What You Need
These rules include template Tables needed to produce the game’s components. Games
are played on a Galaxy Map that can be copied or printed from the last page of the rules.
You will need a deck of Index Cards, preferably half-size cards (3” by 2.5”) because they
are easier to shuffle. Some of these will be made into an initial deck, but others will be
required during play as the deck grows. Pens or pencils are also needed for each player
as cards are made during gameplay. The game requires cubes in two colors, one for New
World Cubes (max 3) and one for Old World Cubes previously discovered (max 33, but
realistically, you need much fewer). Coins in two different denominations can be used as
substitutes. Optionally, you can track your games on a sheet of paper called a Travelogue.
Another option is to also retain a Journal, or notebook, where you can write expanded
descriptions of the worlds you visit. If you do, you should number the pages so you can
more easily find them from indices on the cards. Journal entries can be as long as you
want and detail any aspects suggested by what you generate in the game. They can reflect
the experiences of your visiting star charter, or they can be more like an encyclopedia
entry for the world, covering its ecology, history, or culture. You can also treat your
worlds as each being completely independent entities or envision them as being highly
interrelated. Finally, the tone can be anywhere from serious and somber to light and
whimsical, and this can even vary from world to world. The entries that describe the
worlds may regularly produce humorous combinations if used as is, so you may find it
convenient to adapt or rephrase them to better fit your style.
2.2 Inspirations and Acknowledgments
Many games inspired one or more aspects of Star Charter, including Race for the Galaxy
(Lehmann), SpaceCorp 2025-2300AD (Butterfield), GURPS Space, 4th Edition (Zeigler,
Cambias), Ex Novo (Nerurkar, Dimopoulos), Diaspora (Murray, et al.), The Ultraviolet
Grasslands and the Black City (Rejec), Thousand Year Old Vampire (Hutchings), and Maze
Rats (Milton). My thanks to Shane of www.esotericfulcrum.com and Mike Minutillo
(codermike at www.boardgamegeek.com) for their valuable feedback on the rules.
3 Galaxy Anatomy
The galaxy is represented by a grid, an example of which is shown here. This consists of
hexes, or Sectors, each with a unique two digit number except for the center hex which
contains a supermassive Black Hole at the center of the galaxy, which cannot be entered.
Initially the numbered sectors are empty, but as you visit worlds you will place hub
worlds, minor worlds, and space lanes.
Hub Worlds are marked with a 8. These represent the first worlds discovered in a sector.
Minor Worlds are marked with a * (or a •). These represent any world discovered in a
sector that already has a hub world. Space Lanes are dashed lines between hub worlds,
which represents well-travelled routes that have a lower fuel cost. When you discover a
hub world, you will also name the sector by writing the name at the bottom of the hex.
The galaxy also has three rings depending on distance from the center hex. The Inner
ring includes sectors adjacent to the center. The Mid ring includes sectors two spaces
away from the center. The Outer ring includes sectors three spaces away from the center.
The fuel costs will be much greater when traveling further away from the galactic core.
13
64
14
63
12
15
*
62
65
16
24
8
*
*
61
11
8
*
*
GANDHI
23
*
*
8
53
66
8
WISP
8
TRENCH
22
*
25
*
*
*
GARX
TERMINUS
8
54
21
8
*
*
*
CRAB
52
55
33
26
*
*
8
*
8
ENSOR
KAFKA
8
56
44
34
*
*
*
*
ARCHON
CLARION
51
43
32
35
8
SEAR
42
45
36
41
31
46
4 Card Anatomy
During the game you will discover new worlds on cards. Below is the anatomy of a
completed World card.
FUEL
Hub World or
Minor World?
Sector ##
7
8
56
BOIL
- OCEAN
- CASTE
Name
Biome
Society
Disgusting Appearance
Orderly Beverages
1st Trait
2nd Trait
Journal
Index
(optional) p1
2
Randomizer
1-6
Cards in the deck will all begin Worldless with only a lower right Randomizer (1 – 6).
The other elements are filled in when the card’s world is added. These elements include:
• A curved line used to represent the planet, which contains:
o The world’s Name
o The world’s Biome, or the dominant natural character of the planet
o The world’s Society, or the dominant social character of the planet
• Anywhere from 2 to 3 Traits, or short statements, that further describe the world
• The Fuel value of the card in the upper left, which is equal to the number of worlds
visited before it in this game; this is not actually related directly to the world
• A 8 below the Fuel if the world is the first discovered in a sector, making it a Hub
World, which allows for less expensive travel along space lanes. Otherwise, a * to
indicate a Minor World
• The world’s Sector, which indicates the hex where it is found
• A Journal Index which points to a page of your journal if you are recording further
details about the world; this is purely optional
When you make a world, you will be asked to Create lines and symbols or Write words
on the card or the map, permanently shaping its character in your galaxy.
5 Basic Rules for Cards and Random Numbers
During a game, cards have different states, including
1) in the facedown Deck,
2) in your Hand,
3) in a face-up Discard pile, or
4) in a Travel line, a row of worlds placed below the map.
Each game, cards start in a shuffled facedown deck. When you Draw cards, you pull from
this deck into your hand.
The game will frequently ask you to Roll one or more random numbers. To roll a random
number, place the top card of the deck in the discard and look at its randomizer digit.
This is the random number you rolled.
If you are asked to Roll & Sum, multiple rolls are summed to give a total (e.g., for Biome
and Society tables in Sections 8 and 9).
Play Example: You are creating a new world and you roll & sum 4 numbers to get the
biome. You discard the top four cards from the deck and get 1, 4, 5, and 2. This sums to
12, which gives you a Desert on the Biome table in Section 8. Then you roll & sum 4
numbers to get the world’s society, discarding the top four cards from the deck, which
are 6, 5, 2, 4 or a Monarchy from the Society table in Section 9.
If you are asked to Roll & Mark, multiple rolls are not summed but treated as separate
indexes into a table (e.g., for Adjective and Noun tables in Section 10).
Play Example: You are creating a new world and you roll & mark 3 numbers to get a trait.
You discard the top three cards from the deck and get 1, 4, and 6 and check the Adjective
table to get Stable. You do this again for the Noun table and get 3, 2, and 6, which is Tattoos.
This is combined for the bizarre trait of Stable Tattoos. Repeating this process, the next
discards are 3, 4, and 4 followed by 5, 5, and 1 on the Adjective and Noun tables
respectively. This produces Oblivious Bureaucracy.
You can roll six-sided dice instead of using the cards. Bear in mind, this will alter the
probability of what can be rolled.
If the deck is ever depleted, shuffle the discard pile, and form a new facedown deck.
6 Prologue
6.1 Deck
Before you play your first game, this prologue will help prepare your deck and provide
some practice in making cards and adding to the galaxy map.
To get started, gather 24 blank index cards. In the lower right corner on each write one
number such that there are four each of the integers between 1 and 6. Shuffle these cards.
6.2 Six First Worlds
Select a random card from the deck lacking a world and do the following:
• Create a box in the upper left and write 0 in it
• Create a 8 under the box
• Write the sector number (choose 11 for the first world) under the 8
• Create a curved line representing the world in the upper right and inside the curve:
o Write the name of the world; you can also wait to name the world at any
point during this process
o Roll & Sum 4 on the Biome list (Section 8); write the entry below the name
o Roll & Sum 4 on the Society list (Section 9); write the entry below the biome
• Perform the following twice:
o Roll & Mark 3 on the Adjective table (Section 10)
o Roll & Mark 3 on the Noun table (Section 10)
o Either write in the Adjective Noun pair as a trait for your world or invent a
trait inspired by what this pair suggests to you
• Optionally, you may create a box in the lower left corner and write the page number
of a journal in that box. Then on the page of the journal, you can expand on this
world, writing in a more detailed description suggested by its biome, society, and
its predominant traits. This may also be done outside the game as inspiration
strikes you. You can also Roll & Mark 2 (Section 10) on the Prompt table to get a
suggestion for an entry.
Create a 8 in sector 11 on the galaxy map. Write the name of the sector in the bottom of
sector 11; by default this is the world’s name, but you can choose any name you like.
Repeat what you did in this section for sector 11 for sectors 22, 33, 44, 55, and 66.
6.3 Creating Initial Space Lanes
Create a dashed line between the 8s in each adjacent sector to represent initial space
lanes.
7 Gameplay
At the start of the game, shuffle your deck. Discard cards from the deck until you discard
a world. Place this world on the table below the map to form the first world in the travel
line. Place an old world cube in the sector of the galaxy map that contains this world. An
example travel line with five worlds is below:
0 44. THAMANIN
- DESERT
- MONARCHY
1 55. KISHOR
3 11. SUPEROSE
8
44 55 11 - INNOVATIVE GHOSTS
- CRIMINAL LEGENDS
0 66. ILLUSTRE
- TIDE-LOCKED
- RUIN
- GARDEN
* * *
- MERITOCRACY
8
- DEMOCRACY
- TECHNOCRACY
66 - HONORED
INDIVIDUALS
- OOZING SEASONS
4 22. ISING
- VOLCANIC
- PLUTOCRACY
- TERRIFIED POLITICS
- IMMORAL ORGS
22
- DISGUSTING FIRES
- SOPHISTICATED
INSECTS
- HOSTILE DISCIPLINE
- ANTIQUE MYSTICISM
p4
6
p7
1
p6
5
p8
4
p9
3
The game then proceeds until you either:
1) 2) Cannot navigate or afford the travel cost, in which case you lose, or
Have three new world cubes on the galaxy map, in which case you win.
Each turn has the following phases: 1) draw, 2) navigate, 3) fuel, 4) travel, and 5) visit.
7.1 Draw Phase
Draw until you have 5 cards in your hand.
7.2 Navigate Phase
Select a numbered sector (destination sector) without a cube adjacent to the rightmost
world in the travel line (origin sector). If there are no adjacent numbered sectors without
cubes, then the game ends and you lose.
Play Example: Your hand has three worldless cards, a world in 11 called Amarita, and a
world in 55 called Crownhill. The rightmost world in the travel line is Sciomystis in sector
22, so this is your origin sector. You examine the sectors surrounding it: 11, 16, 23, 21, and
33. Ahead in the fuel phase (7.3) it will cost 6 fuel to travel to 16, 23, or 21 because they
are in the mid ring of the galaxy while your origin sector is in the inner ring. Yet traveling
to 11 or 33 costs 0 fuel. Because you have cards with 0 fuel in your hand (including the
worldless cards), you cannot yet escape the inner ring of the galaxy as you must meet or
exceed the fuel cost to travel there. Thinking to a future turn, you note you have an old
world, Amarita, in an adjacent sector. If you navigate there, you have the option of playing
that world into the travel line, which may extend the length of your trip. This might be
wise for the long term as the further out the new worlds are in the travel line the larger
the value of fuel they will get in their upper corners, making future journeys easier.
7.3 Fuel Phase
Place on the right of the travel line either:
• A card without a world that is in your hand, or
• A world in your hand that is in that sector, or
• A new blank card
If you placed a new blank card, create a box in the blank card’s lower right and roll 1,
writing the value plus 1 in the box, unless it was a 6, in which case write 1. The fuel costs
vary greatly depending on which ring each sector is in. These are:
SECTOR TO SECTOR COST
INNER ßà INNER 0
INNER ßà MID 6
MID ßà MID 12
MID ßà OUTER 18
OUTER ßà OUTER 24
If there is a space lane between the sectors and either the world in the origin sector or the
world in your destination sector is a hub world, then the cost to move is halved.
Discard cards from your hand with the smallest total fuel equal to or greater than the cost
of moving from the origin sector to the destination sector. If possible you must discard a
combination of cards that equals the fuel cost required. You cannot overpay, meaning you
cannot discard a card with non-zero fuel in excess of the minimum you need to travel.
You can discard zero fuel cards. Cards without worlds have zero fuel.
Play Example: You are in sector 21 (the origin sector), adjacent to 22 and 33 (6 fuel cost to
move), 23 and 34 (12 fuel cost to move), and 25 and 26 (18 fuel cost to move). However,
there is an old world cube in 22 (you had travelled from Sciomystis) so you cannot move
there. The five cards in your hand are two worldless cards with 0 fuel, a sector 44 world
with 3 fuel, a sector 33 world with 3 fuel, and a sector 23 world with 9 fuel. You could
travel to the world in sector 33 or travel to a worldless card or a blank that becomes a new
world placed in 33 (at 6 fuel cost) or in 23 or 34 (at 12 fuel cost). You lack the fuel to reach
the outer ring. Neither can you travel to the existing world in 23 because the remaining
cards in your hand would not reach the needed fuel threshold. You decide to travel to
one of the worldless cards in 34 and you discard the 9 fuel card and a 3 fuel card to do it.
If you cannot pay the fuel cost, then the game ends and you lose. If you are recording
your games in a travelogue, write down the next number on the next line (starting at 1 at
the top for the first game) followed by the name of each world you visited, underlining